---
layout: post
title: The Windows Subsystem For Linux
summary: A big change in your development workflow
slug: wsl
featured-img: love-friends
categories: [english]
---

Windows Subsystem for Linux (aka WSL) was a really bold movement from Microsoft and Canonical. It started to change the way we, developers who use Linux in a daily basis, see Microsoft. It can influence which computer we choose to buy and which software we use to be productive.

If you think it did not come to stay, see this page about [Ubuntu on WSL](https://ubuntu.com/wsl) at the official Ubuntu site. Read the arguments and think a little bit.

In this text we will see some important topics about how to use and control WSL effectively. I will focus on the hands-on aspect of WSL.


## How is WSL similar or different from traditional Linux? ##

First of all, **WSL is not Linux**. WSL is an infrastructure to run Linux kernels under Windows as lightweight virtual machines. As its name suggests, it is a subsystem.

The Ubuntu distribution for WSL, for instance, is a real Ubuntu. You manage packages with `apt`, and `bash` is the shell interpreter. Everything works "normal". So normal, that you can even install and run Docker (which uses container virtualization: namespaces, cgroups and chroot) in it. In a nutshell, **the distro is Linux**. However, there are [ways to know you are running under WSL](#how-to-know-if-running-under-wsl).

As I said before, things are "normal". Even so, there are differences between a distro running under WSL and a traditional Linux.

One important difference is: WSL distros do not run SystemD, so you cannot have standard Linux services. If you install, for example, Postgres or Docker, you cannot manage them through `systemctl` and they will not start automatically when you enter the distro. You use the `service` utility to start and stop them. For the same reason, software update does not run automatically. Despite not having Linux services, one can use creativity and [start services when entering the WSL distro](#start-services-when-entering-the-distro).

Additionaly, WSL distros do not clean the `/tmp` directory. So, be careful. There is no such thing as a fresh `/tmp` on each boot. Keep an eye on your disk space.


## How to manage several WSL distros ##

As WSL distros run as virtual machines, we can have many of them installed and running.

We will use the default `wsl` client from the Powershell command line (prompts identified by a `>` symbol). So, you should open the Windows Powershell and do not be afraid to type. We are linuxers, after all.

In a nutshell, you can:

- Manage distros.
- Install a distro from a `.tar.gz` image.
- Uninstall a distro.


### Manage distros

List all installed distros:

```
> wsl --list --all -v
```

You do not need to "start" a WSL distro. You simply enter it:

```
> wsl --distribution MyDistro
```

Terminate (shutdown) a distro:

```
> wsl --terminate MyDistro
```

Shutdown the WSL VM infrastructure. This command will terminate all running distros:

```
> wsl --shutdown
```

### Install a distro from a `.tar.gz` file

You can install any number of distros using this method and have them running simultaneously, as you would do with Vagrant & Virtuabox, for example.

Download a distro image from <https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/bionic/release/> with the `amd64-wsl.rootfs.tar.gz` termination, e.g., [ubuntu-18.04-server-cloudimg-amd64-wsl.rootfs.tar.gz](https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/bionic/release/ubuntu-18.04-server-cloudimg-amd64-wsl.rootfs.tar.gz).

There is a Ubuntu image delivered through [LxRunOffline wiki](https://github.com/DDoSolitary/LxRunOffline/wiki) that is a "core distribution". It does not come with basic utilities, like `sudo` or `curl`. You have to install everything you want.

Import the `.tar.gz` file to transform it into a working distro. I recommend you to create a folder in Windows to gather all distros in a single place.:

```
> wsl --import NewDistro c:\my-wsl-distros\new-distro\ c:\Downloads\my-distro-amd64-wsl.rootfs.tar.gz
```

That's all. NewDistro is installed and you can use it right away.


Natively, `wsl` does not tell us where the distro is installed. To know it and to have access to a lot of additional features, [LxRunOffline](https://github.com/DDoSolitary/LxRunOffline) becomes handy. You install it, and:

```
> LxRunOffline.exe get-dir -n MyDistro
C:\my-wsl-distros\new-distro\
```

Usually, these images come only with the root user enabled. Follow the instructions below to configure a default user `john`, to avoid using `root` directly:

```
> wsl --distribution NewDistro
# adduser john
# adduser john sudo
# echo '[user]' > /etc/wsl.conf
# echo 'default=john' >> /etc/wsl.conf
# exit
> wsl --terminate NewDistro
```

Now you will automatically be the user `john` every time you enter this distro. Check it now:

```
> wsl --distribution NewDistro
```


### Uninstall a distro

**Important notes:**

1. WSL calls it "unregister".
2. The command below will erase the directory you installed the distro in. It will become empty.

Uninstalling a distro is as easy as it was to install it:

```
> wsl --unregister NewDistro
```


## Interoperability between Windows and Linux ##

You can start a service inside WSL and access it from Windows, transparently. For example, you start nginx inside WSL using the port 8000, open a browser in Windows and access `http://127.0.0.1:8000` (aka, localhost:8000) to see the web page.

Another useful scenario is: if you have two (or more) WSL distros running, one can access the other and Windows can access both as well. Just use `127.0.0.1` (localhost) and the corresponding port everywhere. It is transparent, with zero configuration.

Windows programs can access the distro's filesystem. Try the following command from your distro, to open the Windows Explorer for your current directory:

```
$ explorer.exe .
```

You can access Windows folders from inside WSL. The C: drive is mounted as `/mnt/c/`. If you want to access a specific folder using the WSL command line, let's say `C:\Windows\System32` you can use:

```
$ cd /mnt/c/Windows/System32
$ ls *.dll
```

Note the mixed case. In Linux it is important, as usual.


## Which terminal may I use with WSL? ##

The basic Windows' `cmd` works, but I recommend you the new [Windows Terminal](https://github.com/microsoft/terminal) or, better, [Mintty](https://github.com/mintty/wsltty).

You can install [Windows Terminal](https://github.com/microsoft/terminal) from the Microsoft Store. It's quite usable, but not user friendly to customize colours and font.

I usually go with custom colors and [IBM Plex Mono](https://www.ibm.com/plex/) ([Github repo](https://github.com/IBM/plex)) or [Fira Mono](https://mozilla.github.io/Fira/) ([Github repo](https://github.com/mozilla/Fira)) fonts, so I need some easyness on this.

You can see below a small comparison I made on important features for me:

| Feature | Windows cmd | Windows Terminal | Mintty |
|---------|-------------|------------------|--------|
| easy to configure colours | yes | no | yes |
| easy to configure font | yes | no | yes |
| speed | faster | fast | fast |
| support _italics_ | no | no | yes |
| click on a link and open it in browser | no | no | yes, with Shift + Control + click |

Well, why would italics be an important feature? Because I configure my editor to show comments and strings in italics. I like it.

Tip: paste this snippet in the terminal to check if it supports italics:

```
$ echo $(tput sitm)it must appear in italics$(tput ritm)
```

Finally, my personal choice is Mintty.


## How to know if running under WSL ##

There are ways to know if you are running a Linux distro under WSL.

[The official way](https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/423#issuecomment-221627364) recommends looking for "Microsoft" in the kernel release:

```
$ uname -r
4.19.84-microsoft-standard
```

But as we see above, you should check for "microsoft" with all letters in lowercase. Here is an example:

```
if (uname -r | grep -qi microsoft); then
  echo 'Running under WSL'
fi
```

When you inspect the bash environment, you see some useful variables there. Use them at your disposal:

```
$ env | grep WSL
WSL_INTEROP=/run/WSL/18_interop
WSL_DISTRO_NAME=Ubuntu-18.04
WSL_GUEST_IP=172.31.132.120
WSLENV=
```


## Start services when entering the distro ##

As a WSL distro does not have traditional Linux services, you should start them when you want. For example:

```
$ sudo service postgresql start
```

It works, but it is not convenient typing the same command every time you enter the distro. We can do better, by adding the command above to the end of the `~/.profile` file to have the PostgreSQL server launched automatically. Additionally, add a permission in `/etc/sudoers.d` using the `visudo` command, to circumvent the password to enable `sudo`:

```
%sudo   ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/sbin/service postgresql start
```

Now, the PostgreSQL server will start whenever you enter the distro, automatically.

Some services require a more elaborate solution, like the ssh agent, used to keep your private key passphrases during a session:

```
start_ssh_agent () {
  if [[ -n "$SSH_AGENT_PID" ]]; then
    current_agent=$(pgrep -f ssh-agent)
    if [[ "$current_agent" = "$SSH_AGENT_PID" ]]; then
      return
    fi
  fi

  source_file=/tmp/ssh-agent-source-file
  if [[ -f "$source_file" ]]; then
    source $source_file >/dev/null 2>&1
    current_agent=$(pgrep -f ssh-agent)
    if [[ "$current_agent" = "$SSH_AGENT_PID" ]]; then
      return
    fi
  fi

  ssh-agent -s >$source_file
  source $source_file >/dev/null 2>&1
}
```

This approach will start only one ssh agent for a distro. If you open another terminal instance for the same distro, it will reuse the same agent, if it is still valid.

These two solutions are only examples of how services could be started in a Linux distro running under WSL. You have all Linux flexibility to come up with your own solution, for your specific scenario.

There are also solutions to start services under WSL when your Windows host boots up. You can find a lot of them googling.


## Memory and disk reclaim

Some users had reported excessive memory usage by WSL 2. There are two ways to circumvent this problem.

The first one is limiting the amount of memory WSL 2 can use. You must create a file called `.wslconfig` at the `%UserProfile%\.wslconfig` folder in Windows:


```
[wsl2]
memory=6GB
```

Regardless how much RAM you have in your computer, WSL 2 will not use more than the configured amount. Configure it according to your physical memory. You can see all possible configurations in this [release note](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/release-notes#build-https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/release-notes#build-189451894e).

Source: <https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/4166#issuecomment-526725261>

The second option is reclaiming WSL 2 VM's free memory. Windows and WSL 2 work together to recall unused memory when it is actually unused.

It happens that modern operating systems use the remaining available memory that should be unused as a cache to improve performance. Thus, let's say your Linux WSL 2 instance is using only 2GB and it detects more 4GB free memory. It will use it as a cache. So, from now on, the Windows host does not see that memory as available and it cannot reclaim it automatically. How to solve that? Create an alias and use it when you know it is helpful:

```
$ alias drop_cache="sudo sh -c \"echo 3 >'/proc/sys/vm/drop_caches' && swapoff -a && swapon -a && printf '\n%s\n' 'Ram-cache and Swap Cleared'\""
```

Source: <https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/4166#issuecomment-662915558>

Now, moving from memory to disk, there is a known problem of WSL 2 not recovering unused disk space from its volume. Suppose you downloaded a 5GB file into your WSL 2 machine and deleted it. Windows does not see that extra 5GB space again, unless you command it.

To accomplish it, open a Powershell terminal with Administrator privileges and type the following:


```
### Optimize (shrink) WSL 2 .vhdx
## Must be run in PowerShell as Administrator user
# DistroFolder found at: $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Packages\
# Examples:
#   CanonicalGroupLimited.UbuntuonWindows_79rhkp1fndgsc
#   CanonicalGroupLimited.Ubuntu20.04onWindows_79rhkp1fndgsc

# Enter into folder with your WSL 2 virtual disk
cd $env:LOCALAPPDATA\Packages\REPLACE_ME_WITH_TARGET_DISTRO_FOLDERNAME\LocalState\

# Shut all WSL 2 instances down
wsl --shutdown

# Shrink the disk
optimize-vhd -Path .\ext4.vhdx -Mode full
```

Source: <https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/4699#issuecomment-635673427>


## Permissions for files outside WSL

As we saw in the section above, the virtual disk thas does not shrink automatically is one problem in WSL. Thus, you should avoid saving large files inside it as much as you can.

One workaround is allocating files outside WSL, e.g, in Windows folders. Since all Windows' files and folders can be accessed through `/mnt/c`, you could save your big file into the `Downloads` folder and access it from inside WSL. Or, if you have Docker installed directly inside WSL, you can allocate its volumes under `/mnt/c/docker_volumes`, for instance. People say performance may be a bottleneck, but I am using it for some time now without problems.

But nothing runs smoothly all the time. I faced a problem when allocating a Postgres volume outside WSL. Postgres needs specific permissions for its `PGDATA` folder.

By default, WSL cannot change permissions for a file/directory outside its boundaries. All entries have the `chmod 777` permission set.

To overcome this limitation you must create the `/etc/wsl.conf` file inside the WSL distro with this contents:

```
[automount]
options = "metadata"
```

Then, shutdown your WSL distro from Windows Powershell using:

````
PS> wsl --shutdown
```

The next time you enter the distro, you will be able to `chmod` a file or folder outside WSL boundaries and allocate your Postgres `PGDATA` there.

